

ENVIRONMENTAL 
SCIENCES 

Fig. 2. Coef?cient estimates of geographic variables moderating the 
effects of drought on child HAZ scores. Positive coef?cients mitigate the
effects of drought, while negative coef?cients exacerbate the effects of
drought. Some variables were log-transformed, and then all variables were
scaled from 0 to 1. Variables are color-coded according to whether they
characterize a system’s sensitivity to shocks (green) or adaptive capacity
(blue).
countries that did not have DHS data, based on geographic data
for as close to the year 2020 as possible. Thus, we weighed global
data on factors that moderate the effects of drought according
to the coef?cients estimated from our model to predict changes
in HAZ scores under drought (Fig. 3). This map showed that
the most drought vulnerable children are in arid areas with weak
governments and little international trade, such as Chad, Sudan,
Eritrea, South Sudan, Somalia, and Yemen. In addition to these
hotspots of drought vulnerability, other areas with some vulner-
ability included other countries throughout Africa, central Asia,
and the Middle East, as well as Papua New Guinea, North Korea,
and Haiti. Comparing our model’s predictions with observed
changes in food insecurity during recent droughts in southern
and eastern Africa shows that our model performs quite well
(SI Appendix, Fig. S4). 

Discussion
A signi?cant advantage of this study was using a very large
dataset, which allowed us to draw on observations of child nutri-
tion outcomes during droughts across a range of economic,
political, and agroenvironmental conditions. We were thus able
infer how these conditions moderate the relationship between
drought periods and child HAZ scores. We found that precipi-
tation deviations from long-term norms such as minor to severe
droughts or severely wet periods were associated with worse child
nutrition, as measured by child HAZ scores. Using geographic
data associated with the time and location of each child nutri-
tion observation, we modeled how a variety of geospatial factors
amplify or mitigate the effects of drought. Finally, we used this
model to predict globally where current geographic contexts
could contribute to worsened child nutrition outcomes during
the event of a drought, based on how those factors have his-
torically moderated the relationship between drought and HAZ
scores. 
In assessing the relationship between rainfall anomalies 
and child undernutrition, previous studies have taken varied
approaches, with some measuring lifetime growing season pre-
cipitation levels (9, 10) and others looking at rainfall in recent
seasons (27). Thus, we compared precipitation deviations from
long-term norms at multiple timescales for both growing-season
precipitation and full-year precipitation, and we found that the
full-year 24-mo SPEI performed the best in modeling child HAZ
scores. Although a child’s HAZ score is affected by chronic, long-
term undernutrition, the 24-mo SPEI score performed better
than indicators over other time frames, including the SPEI for
the child’s lifetime. This may be due to children experiencing
rapid growth when they receive adequate nutrition following a
period of poor nutrition, a phenomenon known as compensatory
growth or catch-up growth (28, 29). 
We found that a variety of factors improve child nutrition out- 
comes under drought. While many of these factors have been
previously associated with positive nutrition outcomes, including
agricultural and dietary diversity (30), crop production (31), and
trade (32), relatively little research has been conducted exploring
their role in mitigating the effects of drought on child nutri-
tion. Our results indicate that, to build climate-resilient nutrition
systems, policymakers at the national level should focus on effec-
tive governance and trade, while local interventions should focus
on increasing the nutritional diversity of agricultural systems as 
Fig. 3. Expected decrease in mean child HAZ scores during drought conditions. 
Cooper et al. PNAS | August 27, 2019 | vol. 116 | no. 35 | 17221 

Downloaded at Ethiopia: PNAS Sponsored on October 13, 2020